---
layout: post
title:  "Monotype fonts on mobile devices"
categories: frontend
tags: [css, font]
---

While working on the rather minimalistic theme for this page, I decided to go with monotype font. I found something appealing about it. It worked fine on desktop computers, but smartphones and tablets used their default fonts (sans-serif in Android, and serif in iOS).

I haven’t found what is the origin of that but it looks like mobile browsers ignore monotype value of `font-family` property. See the following snippet,

{% highlight css %}
.some-element {
    font-family: Arial, sans-serif;
}
{% endhighlight %}

If browser doesn’t have Arial font (which happens sometimes on linuxes, for instance), it should use sans-serif. It’s useful to define what kind of font we use, so browser won’t go with serif font instead of Arial. There are five such groups:

* `serif`
* `sans-serif`
* `cursive`
* `fantasy`
* `monospace`

Most often used are `serif` and `sans-serif`. I had a need to use `monospace`. And mobiles refused to cooperate. Googling didn’t bring any resolution, so instead I went after default monotype fonts, and used them in my CSS. I don’t like that I had to be that specific, as it means that there is no default fallback, but at least it looks now just as I wanted.

In case of Android it’s Google’s Droid Sans Pro. iOS, for the other hand, has a few of them, and all of them can be seen here: [output.jsbin.com/bisebi/4](http://output.jsbin.com/bisebi/4).

Just one of those things not making sense that you have to remember in this line of work.

## Further reading

* [Article about `font-family` on Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/pl/docs/Web/CSS/font-family)